# Semantics of Variables #

I was talking to
[@misscalcul8](https://twitter.com/misscalcul8/status/666474645906944001)
about representations of linear inequalities. She viewed the solutions
of the inequalities as regions in the coordinate plane. She was
intrigued by representing the solutions as intervals on the number line.
This reminded me of the various semantic roles that variables play.

## Fixed, Unknown Value ##

This is the initial idea of a variable that we present to students.
Here, a variable has a particular, but unknown value. We can learn the
value of the variable by solving an equation. For example, under this
interpretation, the equation `\(2 x + 7 = 21\)` translates to the
question &ldquo;What number, call it `\(x\)`, when doubled and added to
7 equals 21?&rdquo; By solving the equation, we solve the mystery to
discover the value of `\(x\)` to be 7.

Whenever a variable is seen to have a fixed but unknown value, our goal
is to learn the actual value. It is as if the value of the variable,
usually `\(x\)`, is hidden and locked away. We may uncover and retrievethe
the value by employing algebra. This conception of a variable works well
for equations with exactly one solution, but can be extended to other
situations. For equations with more than one solution, like
`\(x^{2}=4\)`, we cannot deduce the true value of `\(x\)`. But we can
conclude that the correct value is either `\(2\)` or `\(-2\)`.
Similarly, inequalities will not typically yield the one true value but
are only able to restrict the possibilities.

When dealing with two or more variables, the fixed but unknown value
interpretation of variables is workable but not profitable. Take
`\(y = x + 3\)` as an example. Here, the idea of a graph is
inconceivable. If the correct values are `\((x, y)= (-3, 0)\)`, then
there cannot be another other values of `\(x\)` and `\(y\)`. Instead of
a line on the coordinate plane, the solution here is a single point.
Granted, if we know nothing about the variables beyond the equation, the
set of possible solutions is `\(\left\{ (t, 2 t + 3)\mid
t\in\mathbb{R}\right\}\)`, but according to this view, only one point is
the correct solution.


## Varying Value ##

## Fixed, Arbitrary Value ##

## Indeterminant Value ##