## Some Peculiarities of Math Symbols ##

We first have to deal with the jumbled mess that is the usage of
mathematical symbols. This may seem odd because math is thought of
as being clear and straight-forward. But as with a natural language
like English, the formal language of mathematics has evolved over time.
Usage, syntax, and grammar of both English and math has changed over
time as new understanding demaned new words, as new theories demaned
new ways of expression, and as styles and fads arose and faded.
Granted, math is much more grammatically strict than English. But both
languages have evolved and will continue to evolve.

I, being the jerk that I am, tend to put my foot down and tell my
students to just get used to this weirdness.  Then, I follow this stern
command up by telling them that this linguistic flexibility can
actually be an asset. Just as Shakespear invented many new words and
grammatical rules to express his creative, so have mathematicians of
the past. The language we use now is a culmination of the creativity
and genius of many people.

### Standard Positioning ###

Think about how the symbols \(\sqrt{\cdot }\), \(\cdot !\), and
\(|\cdot |\) are used and how they are placed by their argument. The
square root \(\sqrt{\cdot }\) covers its argument on the top and left
sides, \(\sqrt{8}\). The factorial symbol stands on the right side of
its argument, \(10!\). And the absolute value symbol is actually two
lines which together sit vertically on the left and right sides,
\(| x - 4 |\).

Other standard, but less common, positioning schemes are
[Polish notation (PN)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polish_notation) and
[reverse Polish notation (APN)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_Polish_notation).
These allow one to reposition symbols like \(+\), so that the
expression &ldquo;\(3 + 4\)&rdquo; becomes &ldquo;\(+\, 3\, 4\)&rdquo;
in PN and &ldquo;\(3\, 4\, +\)&rdquo; in RPN.

### Alternative Positioning ###

Of course these are just conventions. They can be changed at a whim.
But trying to communicate \(4!\) by writing \(\overset{!}{4}\) is about
as effective as trying to use the word &ldquo;treat&rdquo; instead of
the word &ldquo;cord&rdquo;. In either case, people will look at you
funny.

That is the case unless you're an idosyncratic mathematician writing a
textbook for other mathematicians or you're programming. Mathematicians
are weird, part of which involves having their own favorite way of
using symbols. Even I have my preferences. And I've seen a handful of
textbooks do rather standard things in different ways. There are also
symbols which typicall vary between textbooks, such as the symbol for
the complement of a set. In your class, stick with the standards. Feel
free to tell your students that when they become mathematical
grown-ups, then they can do what they like; but until then, they have
to do it this way because the evil math grown-ups say so.

With programming languages, symbols, or syntax as they would say it,
can be even weirder. Just compare the syntaxes of languages like
[LISP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_%28programming_language%29#Syntax_and_semantics),
[Smalltalk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smalltalk#Expressions), or
[APL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APL_%28programming_language%29)
(only look at APL if you have a very strong consitution and a custom
keyboard). As any programming language is more formal than mathematics,
the ability to be expressive is even more important than standards and
traditions.